Document hive storage table properties (#10817)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/connector/hive.rst

                                                   not make smart decisions about the query plan.
================================================== ============================================================ ============

> Storage table properties

Reviewer: I think just "Table properties" might be better

Reviewer 2: Yes. These are general table properties that apply to all tables - not just the backing tables for a materialized view.

@rosewms You can see the available ones by querying `SELECT * FROM system.metadata.table_properties` (documented on https://trino.io/docs/current/sql/create-table.html#description).
That won't list "all possible" though - it lists according to how the Hive connector is configured.

A note linking to (or mentioning) how to get an exhaustive list would be very useful too.

------------------------

> 

Reviewer: Needs explanation what they are and how to use them

> .. list-table:: Hive connector storage table properties

Reviewer: Also needs to have example CTAS queries and maybe link to ALTER TABLE SET PROPERTIES as well. 

Some examples already exist in the doc . move them into this context if appropriate

  Flush Hive metadata cache entries connected with selected partition.
  Procedure requires named parameters to be passed

.. _hive-table-properties:

Table properties
----------------

Table properties supply or set metadata for the underlying storage tables, this
is key for :doc:`/sql/create-table-as` statements. Table properties are passed
to the connector using a :doc:`WITH </sql/create-table-as>` clause::

  CREATE TABLE tablename 
  WITH (format='CSV', 
        csv_escape = '"')

See the :ref:`hive-table-examples` for more information.

.. list-table:: Hive connector storage table properties
  :widths: 20, 60, 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Property name
    - Description
    - Default
  * - ``auto_purge``
    - The skip trash when table or partition is deleted.
    -
  * - ``avro_schema_url``

>     - The ``URI`` pointing to Avro schema for the table.

Author: According to the info I pulled, its `URI` not `URL` unless what I assume is an `I` is actually a lowercase `l`...

>     - The ``URI`` pointing to Avro schema for the table.

Reviewer 2: It's URI in this case since it can also point to files like `file:///my/avro/schema.avsc`

>     - The ``URI`` pointing to Avro schema for the table.

Author: Thanks @hashhar

    -
  * - ``bucket_count``
    - The number of buckets to group data into. 
      Must be used with ``bucketed_by``.
    -
  * - ``bucketed_by``
    - The bucketing column for the storage table. 
      Must be used with ``bucketed_count``.
    -
  * - ``bucketing_version``

>     - The bucketing version.

Author: @hashhar can you expand on the definition of bucketing version or tag someone who can help? Thanks!

    -
  * - ``csv_escape``

>     - CSV escape character. Can only be used with a ``CSV`` format table.

Author: It is mentioned in the supported formats but it isn't defined there. I did a search of the docs and found it defined here: https://trino.io/docs/current/installation/cli.html?#output-formats

I can link to that section if that's useful?

    -
  * - ``csv_quote``
    - The ``CSV`` quote character. Can only be used with a ``CSV`` format table.
    -
  * - ``csv_separator``
    - The ``CSV`` separator character. Can only be used with a ``CSV`` format 
      table.
    -
  * - ``external_location``
    - The file system, URI location for an external Hive table on S3, Azure Blob 

>       Storage, etc.

Author: Working on finding one to add.

    -
  * - ``format``
    - The table file format. Valid values include ``ORC``, ``PARQUET``, ``AVRO``, 
      ``RCBINARY``, ``RCTEXT``, ``SEQUENCEFILE``, ``JSON``, ``TEXTFILE``, and 
      ``CSV``. The catalog property ``hive.storage-format`` sets the default 
      value and can change it to a different default.
    - ``ORC``
  * - ``null_format``
    - The serialization format for ``NULL`` value. Can only be used with 

>       ``TEXTFILE``, ``RCTEXT``, or ``SEQUENCEFILE`` format tables.

Author: @hashhar can you explain the valid values. When I listed all the property_names and descriptions the only explanation was:

> The serialization format for ``NULL`` value.

I found that additional info in a different doc and added it.

>       ``TEXTFILE``, ``RCTEXT``, or ``SEQUENCEFILE`` format tables.

Author: @hashhar bumping this comment to see if there is more info that I should add? If not, I believe its ready to be merged?

    -
  * - ``orc_bloom_filter_columns``

>     - The ``ORC`` bloom filter index columns. Can only be used with 

Reviewer 2: I don't have a lot of info on bloom filters in Hive connector. @Praveen2112 might know more.

>     - The ``ORC`` bloom filter index columns. Can only be used with 

Author: @Praveen2112 can you lend your expertise here about bloom filters in the Hive connector?

>     - The ``ORC`` bloom filter index columns. Can only be used with 

Author: I did a search of the current Trino docs and this is what I found for bloom filters:

> Improve performance of queries using range predicates when reading ORC files with Bloom filters. ([#4108](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/4108))

Should the definition be something like: 

> The ``ORC`` bloom filter index columns. It improves the performance of queries using range predicates when reading ORC files. Only valid when used with ORC format tables.

      ``ORC`` format tables.
    - 
  * - ``orc_bloom_filter_fpp``
    - The ``ORC`` bloom filter false positive probability. Can only be used with
      ``ORC`` format tables.
    - 
  * - ``partitioned_by``
    - The partitioning column for the storage table. The columns listed in the 
      ``partitioned_by`` clause must be the last columns as defined in the DDL. 
      Otherwise, you get an error from Trino.
    - ``[]``
  * - ``skip_footer_line_count``
    - The number of footer lines. Can only be used with ``TEXTFILE`` or ``CSV`` 
      format tables.
    - 
  * - ``skip_header_line_count``
    - The number of header lines. Can only be used with ``TEXTFILE`` or ``CSV`` 
      format tables.
    -
  * - ``sorted_by``
    - The column to sort by to determine bucketing for row. Can only be used if 
      ``bucketed_by`` and ``bucket_count`` are specified as well.
    - ``[]``
  * - ``textfile_field_separator``

>     - The ``TEXTFILE`` field separator character. Can only be used with 

Author: Working on finding one.

      ``TEXTFILE`` format tables.
    - 
  * - ``textfile_field_separator_escape``

>     - The ``TEXTFILE`` field separator escape character. Can only be used with 

Author: Working on finding one.

      ``TEXTFILE`` format tables.
    -
  * - ``transactional``

>     - The table is transactional.

Reviewer 2: I believe setting this property to true and using ORC file format with a supported metastore allows Trino to perform transactional operations on the table (same as Hive ACID?). @losipiuk will know more.

>     - The table is transactional.

Reviewer 3: It maps to Hive's `transactional` table property.

If the table is created via Trino it can be only used for ORC-based tables. In such case, ORC ACID tables are being created.
If one tries to use it with a different file format Trino will reject `CREATE` query.

Note: If one creates an old-style insert_only table via Hive then Trino will also show `transactinal=true` for that table. 
@findepi it feels like it would make sense to change semantics here. It can be confusing. WDYT?

>     - The table is transactional.

Reviewer 2: I don't believe we can simplify without lying about what table properties are set in the metastore. Hive uses `transactional = true` for both types of tables.

>     - The table is transactional.

Reviewer 4: Table properties are for defining tables. `transactional=true` is for creating ORC ACID transactional tables (format must be ORC as well). 

optionally, if we want, we can document that SHOW CREATE TABLE shows `transactional=true` also for insert-only tables.

i don't see a lie here.

>     - The table is transactional.

Reviewer 2: So in summary:

- Setting transactional = true + ORC table format = ORC ACID tables
- transactional = true for insert-only tables too (but we cannot create such tables via Trino)

>     - The table is transactional.

Reviewer 4: @hashhar do you know what happens if you CT with transactional=true, but with format != ORC ?
do we reject? does HMS reject?

>     - The table is transactional.

Reviewer 2: The metastore rejects (i.e. buggy metastores might allow doing so?).

e.g. on HDP3 PT env started as `./testing/bin/ptl env up --environment multinode --config config-hdp3`

```
trino:default> create table transactional_parquet (a int) with (transactional=true, format='PARQUET');
Query 20220214_111431_00016_6veaq failed: The table must be stored using an ACID compliant format (such as ORC): default.transactional_parquet
io.trino.spi.TrinoException: The table must be stored using an ACID compliant format (such as ORC): default.transactional_parquet
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.ThriftHiveMetastore.createTable(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:1084)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.BridgingHiveMetastore.createTable(BridgingHiveMetastore.java:204)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.cache.CachingHiveMetastore.createTable(CachingHiveMetastore.java:474)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.HiveMetastoreClosure.createTable(HiveMetastoreClosure.java:165)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.SemiTransactionalHiveMetastore$CreateTableOperation.run(SemiTransactionalHiveMetastore.java:3259)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.SemiTransactionalHiveMetastore$Committer.executeAddTableOperations(SemiTransactionalHiveMetastore.java:2135)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.SemiTransactionalHiveMetastore.commitShared(SemiTransactionalHiveMetastore.java:1472)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.SemiTransactionalHiveMetastore.commit(SemiTransactionalHiveMetastore.java:1211)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.HiveMetadata.commit(HiveMetadata.java:3382)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.HiveTransactionManager.lambda$commit$0(HiveTransactionManager.java:59)
	at java.base/java.util.Optional.ifPresent(Optional.java:183)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.HiveTransactionManager.commit(HiveTransactionManager.java:57)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.HiveConnector.commit(HiveConnector.java:207)
	at io.trino.transaction.InMemoryTransactionManager$TransactionMetadata$ConnectorTransactionMetadata.commit(InMemoryTransactionManager.java:623)
	at java.base/java.util.concurrent.Executors$RunnableAdapter.call(Executors.java:515)
	at com.google.common.util.concurrent.TrustedListenableFutureTask$TrustedFutureInterruptibleTask.runInterruptibly(TrustedListenableFutureTask.java:131)
	at com.google.common.util.concurrent.InterruptibleTask.run(InterruptibleTask.java:74)
	at com.google.common.util.concurrent.TrustedListenableFutureTask.run(TrustedListenableFutureTask.java:82)
	at io.airlift.concurrent.BoundedExecutor.drainQueue(BoundedExecutor.java:80)
	at io.trino.$gen.Trino_370_86_ge4153b0_dirty____20220214_111237_2.run(Unknown Source)
	at java.base/java.util.concurrent.ThreadPoolExecutor.runWorker(ThreadPoolExecutor.java:1128)
	at java.base/java.util.concurrent.ThreadPoolExecutor$Worker.run(ThreadPoolExecutor.java:628)
	at java.base/java.lang.Thread.run(Thread.java:829)
Caused by: org.apache.hadoop.hive.metastore.api.MetaException: The table must be stored using an ACID compliant format (such as ORC): default.transactional_parquet
	at org.apache.hadoop.hive.metastore.api.ThriftHiveMetastore$create_table_result$create_table_resultStandardScheme.read(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:54418)
	at org.apache.hadoop.hive.metastore.api.ThriftHiveMetastore$create_table_result$create_table_resultStandardScheme.read(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:54386)
	at org.apache.hadoop.hive.metastore.api.ThriftHiveMetastore$create_table_result.read(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:54312)
	at org.apache.thrift.TServiceClient.receiveBase(TServiceClient.java:86)
	at org.apache.hadoop.hive.metastore.api.ThriftHiveMetastore$Client.recv_create_table(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:1539)
	at org.apache.hadoop.hive.metastore.api.ThriftHiveMetastore$Client.create_table(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:1526)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.ThriftHiveMetastoreClient.createTable(ThriftHiveMetastoreClient.java:176)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.FailureAwareThriftMetastoreClient.lambda$createTable$7(FailureAwareThriftMetastoreClient.java:132)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.FailureAwareThriftMetastoreClient.runWithHandle(FailureAwareThriftMetastoreClient.java:474)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.FailureAwareThriftMetastoreClient.createTable(FailureAwareThriftMetastoreClient.java:132)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.ThriftHiveMetastore.lambda$createTable$51(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:1072)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.ThriftMetastoreApiStats.lambda$wrap$0(ThriftMetastoreApiStats.java:42)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.util.RetryDriver.run(RetryDriver.java:130)
	at io.trino.plugin.hive.metastore.thrift.ThriftHiveMetastore.createTable(ThriftHiveMetastore.java:1070)
	... 22 more

trino:default> create table transactional_orc (a int) with (transactional=true, format='ORC');
CREATE TABLE
```

  Flush Hive metadata cache entries connected with selected partition.
  Procedure requires named parameters to be passed

Table properties
----------------

.. list-table:: Hive connector storage table properties
  :widths: 20, 60, 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Property name
    - Description
    - Default
  * - ``auto_purge``

>     - The skip trash when table or partition is deleted.

Reviewer 2: This is only prespcriptive. It's up to the Hive Metastore to honor or not honor this. For example Glue doesn't have this concept at all and different vendors/versions of HMS might have different behaviours.

Reviewer 2: Reword as `Indicate to the Hive metastore being used to skip trash when table or partition is deleted.` (i.e. this table property isn't acted upon by Trino at all).

    -
  * - ``avro_schema_url``
    - The ``URI`` pointing to Avro schema for the table.
    -
  * - ``bucket_count``
    - The number of buckets to group data into. 
      Must be used with ``bucketed_by``.
    -
  * - ``bucketed_by``
    - The bucketing column for the storage table. 
      Must be used with ``bucketed_count``.
    -
  * - ``bucketing_version``
    - The bucketing version.
    -
  * - ``csv_escape``
    - CSV escape character.
    -
  * - ``csv_quote``
    - The ``CSV`` quote character.
    -
  * - ``csv_separator``
    - The ``CSV`` separator character.

>     -

Author: @hashhar I assume that applies to all three of the CVS definitions, is that correct?

>     -

Reviewer 2: Correct.

  * - ``external_location``
    - The file system, URI location for an external Hive 
      table on S3, Azure Blob Storage, etc.
    -
  * - ``format``

>     - The file format to use in the storage. Valid values include ``ORC``,
>       ``PARQUET``, ``CSV``, ``JSON`` and others. The catalog property

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The file format to use for the table. Valid values include ``ORC``,
      ``PARQUET``, ``AVRO``, ``RCBINARY``, ``RCTEXT``, ``SEQUENCEFILE``, ``JSON``, ``TEXTFILE`` and ``CSV``. The catalog property
```

>       ``hive.storage-format`` sets the default value to ``ORC`` and can be used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      ``hive.storage-format`` sets the default value for this and can be used
```

      to set a different default.

>     - ``ORC``

Reviewer 2: Should mention `hive.storage-format` instead of literally ORC.

Reviewer 2: bump.

This will be incorrect if someone has `hive.storage-format` set to `JSON` for example.

Author: @hashhar is the default actually `ORC` and then someone could set it to `JSON`? Or is there no actual default for the ``format`` and a customer can set it to anything?

Reviewer: hive.storage-format is defaults to ORC .. but it can be set to whatever in each catalog.. and that is default then.

  * - ``null_format``

>     - The serialization format for ``NULL`` value.

Reviewer 2: `Can only be used with ``TEXTFILE``, ``RCTEXT`` or ``SEQUENCEFILE`` format tables.`

    -
  * - ``orc_bloom_filter_columns``
    - The ``ORC`` bloom filter index columns.
    - 
  * - ``orc_bloom_filter_fpp``

>     - The ``ORC`` bloom filter false positive probability.

Reviewer 2: `Can only be used with ``ORC`` format tables.`

Reviewer 2: Applies to both orc prefixed properties.

    - 
  * - ``partitioned_by``
    - The partitioning column for the storage table. The columns listed in the 
      ``partitioned_by`` clause must be the last columns as defined in the DDL. 
      Otherwise, you get an error from Trino.
    - ``[]``
  * - ``skip_footer_line_count``
    - The number of footer lines.
    - 
  * - ``skip_header_line_count``
    - The number of header lines.

>     -

Reviewer 2: `Can only be used with ``TEXTFILE`` or ``CSV`` format tables.`

Reviewer 2: Applies to both `skip_` properties

  * - ``sorted_by``

>     - The column to sort by to determine bucketing for row.

Reviewer 2: ``Can only be used if `bucketed_by` and `bucket_count` are specified as well.``?

    - ``[]``
  * - ``textfile_field_separator``
    - The ``TEXTFILE`` field separator character.
    - 
  * - ``textfile_field_separator_escape``
    - The ``TEXTFILE`` field separator escape character.

>     -

Reviewer 2: `Can only be used with ``TEXTFILE`` format tables`

Reviewer 2: Applies to both `textfile_` properties.

  * - ``orc_bloom_filter_fpp``
    - The ORC bloom filters false positive probability. Requires ORC format.
    - 0.05
  * - ``partitioned_by``
    - The partitioning column for the storage table. The columns listed in the 
      ``partitioned_by`` clause must be the last columns as defined in the DDL. 
    - ``[]``
  * - ``skip_footer_line_count``
    - The number of footer lines to ignore when parsing the file for data.  
      Requires TextFile or CSV format tables.
    - 
  * - ``skip_header_line_count``
    - The number of header lines to ignore when parsing the file for data. 
      Requires TextFile or CSV format tables.
    -
  * - ``sorted_by``
    - The column to sort by to determine bucketing for row. Only valid if 
      ``bucketed_by`` and ``bucket_count`` are specified as well.
    - ``[]``
  * - ``textfile_field_separator``
    - Allows the use of custom field separators, such as '|', for TextFile 
      formatted tables.
    - '|'
  * - ``textfile_field_separator_escape``
    - Allows the use of a custom escape character for TextFile formatted tables.
    - 
  * - ``transactional``
    - Set ``transactional=true`` to create an ORC ACID transactional table. 

>       Requires ORC format.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add:

```
This property may be shown as true for insert-only tables created via older versions of Hive.
```

  Flush Hive metadata cache entries connected with selected partition.
  Procedure requires named parameters to be passed

.. _hive_table_properties:

Table properties
----------------

Table properties supply or set metadata for the underlying tables. This
is key for :doc:`/sql/create-table-as` statements. Table properties are passed
to the connector using a :doc:`WITH </sql/create-table-as>` clause::

  CREATE TABLE tablename 
  WITH (format='CSV', 
        csv_escape = '"')

See the :ref:`hive_examples` for more information.

.. list-table:: Hive connector table properties
  :widths: 20, 60, 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Property name
    - Description
    - Default
  * - ``auto_purge``
    - Indicates to the configured metastore to perform a purge when a table or 
      partition is deleted instead of a soft deletion using the trash.
    -
  * - ``avro_schema_url``
    - The URI pointing to :ref:`hive_avro_schema` for the table.
    -
  * - ``bucket_count``
    - The number of buckets to group data into. Only valid if used with
      ``bucketed_by``.
    - 0
  * - ``bucketed_by``
    - The bucketing column for the storage table. Only valid if used with 
      ``bucket_count``.

>     -

Reviewer 2: default value is empty array. `[]`

  * - ``bucketing_version``
    - The bucketing version.
    -
  * - ``csv_escape``
    - CSV escape character. Can only be used with a ``CSV`` format table.
    -
  * - ``csv_quote``

>     - The ``CSV`` quote character. Can only be used with a ``CSV`` format table.

Reviewer 3: Keep consistent format

    - The CSV quote character. Requires CSV format.
    -
  * - ``csv_separator``
    - The CSV separator character. Requires CSV format.
    -
  * - ``external_location``
    - The URI for an external Hive table on S3, Azure Blob Storage, etc. See the
      :ref:`hive_examples` for more information.
    -
  * - ``format``
    - The table file format. Valid values include ``ORC``, ``PARQUET``, ``AVRO``, 
      ``RCBINARY``, ``RCTEXT``, ``SEQUENCEFILE``, ``JSON``, ``TEXTFILE``, and 
      ``CSV``. The catalog property ``hive.storage-format`` sets the default 
      value and can change it to a different default.
    - 
  * - ``null_format``
    - The serialization format for ``NULL`` value. Requires TextFile, RCText, 

>       or SequenceFile format.

Reviewer 2: Just for information - `null_format` can be set to a string that is then interpreted as a marker for `NULL` values in table files.

e.g. with `null_format = 'NULL_VALUE_MARKER'` and a TextFile table with some line like `a\u0001NULL_VALUE_MARKER\u0001null value` would get read as 3 columns `a`, `NULL` and `null value`.

If we want to document this it should be a separate effort - not part of this PR.

Author: @mosabua how should I proceed here?

    -
  * - ``orc_bloom_filter_columns``
    - Comma separated list of columns to use for ORC bloom filter. It improves 
      the performance of queries using range predicates when reading ORC files. 
      Requires ORC format.

>     - []

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `[]`
```

  * - ``orc_bloom_filter_fpp``
    - The ORC bloom filters false positive probability. Requires ORC format.
    - 0.05
  * - ``partitioned_by``
    - The partitioning column for the storage table. The columns listed in the 
      ``partitioned_by`` clause must be the last columns as defined in the DDL. 
    - ``[]``
  * - ``skip_footer_line_count``
    - The number of footer lines to ignore when parsing the file for data.  
      Requires TextFile or CSV format tables.
    - 
  * - ``skip_header_line_count``
    - The number of header lines to ignore when parsing the file for data. 
      Requires TextFile or CSV format tables.
    -
  * - ``sorted_by``
    - The column to sort by to determine bucketing for row. Only valid if 
      ``bucketed_by`` and ``bucket_count`` are specified as well.
    - ``[]``
  * - ``textfile_field_separator``
    - Allows the use of custom field separators, such as '|', for TextFile 
      formatted tables.
    - '|'
  * - ``textfile_field_separator_escape``
    - Allows the use of a custom escape character for TextFile formatted tables.
    - 
  * - ``transactional``

>     - Set ``transactional=true`` to create an ORC ACID transactional table. 

Reviewer 2: WDYT?
```suggestion
    - Set this property to ``true`` to create an ORC ACID transactional table. 
```

      Requires ORC format. This property may be shown as true for insert-only 
      tables created using older versions of Hive.

>     - false

Reviewer 2: default value is null so should be left empty
